# Masks and Faces: An Essay on Punjabi Kinship

**VEENA DAS**

The character of Punjabi kinship is best described as a dialectic between the rules deriving from nature and the rules deriving from culture.¹ In the Punjabi theory of kinship, the biological facts of procreation and copulation are said to create certain primordial ties between individuals, which are strong and immutable, and which belong to the realm of human nature. Kinship as biology has to deal with these facts of nature. However, kinship as a social fact is not considered to be a restatement of these natural facts. Instead, the essence of proper kinship behaviour is to transcend these facts of nature. We shall argue that honour, which is one of the most valued ideals among the Punjabis, is acquired and enhanced by transcending natural forces rather than succumbing to them. The transcendence, insofar as it violates human nature, is often represented either as a mask which is worn to disguise the pre-social

¹ In writing this paper, I have been greatly influenced by the works of Peter Berger, Thomas Luckmann, Irving Goffman, and David Schneider.

The data presented here were collected from fifty households of urban Punjabis, forming a single, open-ended kinship network, in the years 1974-5. Most of these households are in Delhi, but some are also scattered in other urban areas such as Bombay, Calcutta, Amritsar, Ferozepur, and Ludhiana. The informants included in the study were all residents of the Punjab before the partition of India. Their genealogies show that their ancestors either migrated to, or were resident in, urban areas since 1900. The present occupational positions of these informants fall in a wide range including petty shopkeepers, members of different professions, and large industrialists. Correspondingly the income levels of the households also show a wide variation. In terms of sect affiliations, the informants include members of Arya Samaj, Sanatan Dharm, as well as Sikhs. I may also mention that a few core families of this network have been known to me for the last twenty years and I am, indeed, very grateful to them for their generosity in allowing me to share so many intimate aspects of their lives.

Excerpted from *Contributions to Indian sociology* (n.s.) 10.1 (1976): 1-30. 
or anti-social currents operating in the biological substratum, or it is represented as a sacrifice which lifts an individual from his lower-self to his 'higher-self'. The negation of honour is expressed in shame or 'loss of face'.

Every society must define for itself, a particular relation between nature and culture. Accordingly, the kinship system must work out a scheme to be assigned to the biological processes of procreation and copulation.² One type of relation may be that in which the moral order is seen as based on the natural order, so that offences against the moral code become offences against human nature. For instance, homosexuality, and other such sexual offences may be seen not only as offences against the moral code but also against human nature. Similarly, rules of incest taboo may be seen as expressive of a natural morality, rather than the morality of any one particular community.

On the other hand, human nature may be seen as essentially animal in origin and the whole task of socialization may be to enable one to overcome the animality inherent in it. In this case the moral code is essentially in opposition to the natural code. ... The system of Punjabi kinship postulates that behind the social ordering of reality lies the pre-social domain of biology. Human conduct is derived from a dialectic between this biological substratum and the socially constructed nomos.³ These two strata are distinct though they may partially overlap. The Punjabi belief is that conduct derived from the biological substratum cannot be suppressed but that it should be kept in the backstage, away from public view. The backstage is not any less real than the frontstage where behaviour is governed by rules derived from the cultural stratum.⁴ In fact, the cultural nomos about kinship is, as it were, constructed at the expense of the natural biological forces; it belongs to the world of appearances and is precariously balanced since it is always in danger of slipping back to the world of biological realities. We shall

² The expression 'kinship system' is being used here to indicate the systematic (as distinct from arbitrary) nature of Punjabi kinship. ... The discussion on the place of biology in kinship systems is, of course, very old. It seems to me that the problem is not to explain how much of kinship behaviour is explained by biology, but the way in which facts of biology are incorporated within kinship systems. In other words, the problem is not to show that culture is part of nature but to show the schematic manner in which culture includes and transforms nature.

³ The term 'nomos' is used here in the sense proposed by Berger and Luckmann (1966) and by Goffman (1958: 128). It has been adapted here from Goffman for somewhat different purposes.

⁴ The fine distinction between behaviour 'on stage' and behaviour 'backstage' was introduced by Goffman (1958: 128). It has been adapted here from Goffman for somewhat different purposes.

now substantiate these arguments by first describing the distinctiveness of kinship as biology, and kinship as socially constructed nomos, and then showing how individual conduct is conceived as derived from a dialectic between the two (cf. Berger 1966).

## I

### KINSHIP AS BIOLOGY

The two fundamental facts of biology with which kinship morality has to reckon, the Punjabis say, are facts of procreation and copulation. The Punjabi theory of procreation is that the woman provides the field and the man provides the seed.³ As in the classical Hindu theory, the quality of the offspring is determined by the quality of the seed. Nevertheless, the field should be able to bear the seed. If the seed is very powerful, it will 'burn the field'. Hence it is important that the qualities of the genitor and the genetrix are evenly matched. The man's role in procreation ends with the depositing of the seed and this act is seen as *garbhadana*, the gift of conception, given by the man to the woman.

The seed grows into a child in the mother's womb. The bones of the child are formed by the semen and the blood is formed by the mother's blood. This is why menstruation is said to cease in a pregnant woman. The mother keeps the child in her womb for nine months. The behaviour of the mother in these nine months has a vital impact on the health and character of the unborn child. During this period it is important that the mother observe a number of dietary taboos, eat special foods for the health of the baby, keep ritual observances and also keep her thoughts pure. The act of 'keeping the child in the womb for nine months' is conceptualized as an act of sacrifice. Old women often remind their adult children of this sacrifice and expect filial piety in return. The mutual love of the mother and the child is considered 'pre-social' in that it comes spontaneously and flows from natural, unlearned behaviour. People often say that a wife is replaceable since one woman is as good as another for purposes of procreation, but that a mother is irreplaceable. As a proof of this they often quote the fact that when in pain a person always calls his mother (*huy main*), but never his father or his wife. Thus, they argue, when all one's defences are down, as in sickness, and all the masks of social obligation have been laid aside, one turns for comfort to the mother.

For the first few months or years, the mother suckles the baby. During the period that the mother is nursing she has to observe strict taboos about food. These taboos are explained within the framework of hot and cold foods. Hot foods generally arouse passion and are associated with virility and power. They are also conducive to producing different kinds of flows from the body. Certain cold foods are associated with purity and asceticism and help one to control the demands and passions of the senses. Other kinds of cold foods, however, lead to indifference and sloth and bring the animal aspects of nature to the surface. The mother who is nursing a baby is given some kinds of hot foods and spices to help the milk flow but she has to avoid excessively hot foods which may make her milk so hot that it may cause diarrhoea in a small baby. The quality of the mother's milk is important, not only for the physical health of the baby but also for building his character. Hence certain undesirable characteristics such as cowardice, incapacity to take risks, stubbornness, etc., are sometimes attributed to the fact that the person was suckled by a wet-nurse. The biological process of shaping the baby in the womb and nursing him are said to create unalienable affection between mother and child. The mother is, therefore, credited with an instinctive understanding of the child which is said to defy all rules of rationality and logic. As we shall see later, a good deal of kinship behaviour consists in deindividuating the mother-child relationship in the context of the *biradari*, and it comes to be re-emphasized only when it is posited in contradistinction to another strong biological relationship, that of sexuality.

The relation between a father and a child is considered less intimate than the relation between a mother and a child. Though the 'pull of blood' (*khoon da khichao*) attracts the child to the father, the fact that it is in the mother's womb that the child spent the first nine months and because it is the mother's milk that he has sucked, binds the child much more strongly to the mother than the father. In fact, full-siblings are said to have a natural solidarity because they are 'children of a single womb' and because they have 'sucked the same milk. This is not to say that hostility between siblings is not expected. On the contrary, people argue that property turns brothers into enemies. Brothers who are fighting over property are described as dogs fighting over a bone. The term *sharika*, which may be translated as male agnates, or co-parceners, implies conflict. The relation between two sisters is not that of *sharika*, though in cases of fights the parents may reprimand them by saying, 'Are you two indulging in *shariki*?' Thus hostility between brothers, though expected and to an extent natural, is considered less than human. It implies that greed over property has made them relinquish even the biological ties established by their having shared the same womb and sucked the same milk. This hostility can never be legitimized, either in terms of human values or in terms of the moral values of honour and face.

To return to the biological ties between the mother and the child, it is often stated by Punjabis that the strength of the bond is stronger for the mother than for the child. The child slowly grows up and sheds his dependence on the mother. After he gets married, the bonds created by his sexuality come in direct conflict with the bonds created by procreation. This conflict keeps coming to the surface especially in the case of sons due to the fact of common residence of parents and their married sons. A woman may effectively disguise her love for her children but it is ever-present and is a moving force in all her actions. People often say that a mother can never be a bad mother (*kumaiya*) though a son may be a bad son (*kuputra*). A woman who is considered devoid of any love for her children is considered less than human, and often sinister. This is why, despite the attempts to de-individualize the mother-child relation at the level of social kinship, it is taken for granted that a mother has a strong natural bond with her children which can be disguised or even sacrificed, but which cannot be obliterated.

The second biological act, which is seen as creating some common bonds between two people, is the act of coitus. We shall show that at the level of culturally constructed nomos, the bonds resulting from sexual relations are not given an explicit place. At this level, the only justification for sex is that it is necessary for procreation. However, the cultural notions of human nature stress the importance of the fulfilment of sexual needs for both men and women. Though bonds of sexuality are not explicitly recognized at the level of social kinship, the social nomos does not deny their importance. but only relegates them to a backstage, which is hidden from public view. Sexual needs are attributed to both men and women and are directly linked to the physical manifestations of puberty. There are many analogies which are used for sexual fulfilment. A young girl who is ready for sexual love is described as a pot of freshly made yoghurt ready to be churned. A sexually unfulfilled woman is described as having a thirsty body. Parents of young girls consider it unwise to leave a girl unmarried for a very long time as unfulfilled sexuality may lead a girl to form unfortunate liaisons. Since the sexuality of women has to be protected with much greater care than the sexuality of men (see Yalman 1963), every effort is made to control the growth of passion in young girls. It is believed that simple food and simple clothes are most conducive to keeping sexual urges dormant. Thus, hot foods like betelnuts and mutton are not given to young girls, nor are they allowed to wear bright colours like red, or use flowers, which are the prerogatives of married women.

We said earlier that sexuality is not denied, it is only relegated to the backstage. The backstage, of course, is not only considered real but also important. For instance, after a girl's marriage, the parents are extremely interested in knowing whether her husband is sexually virile and whether their marriage has been properly consummated, though this concern is not articulated. Direct access to the backstage, however, is limited to a very few people. These are the people who come under the general category of joking relationships. A girl's parents or her brother would not themselves question her about the sexual aspects of her relationship with her husband. However, it is no breach of etiquette for her brother's wife to find out through direct questioning and half-serious banter about the husband's virility. Though a friend or an older sister may also participate in the teasing, they cannot communicate any information to the girl's mother due to the taboo on discussions about sex between parents and children. Within a girl's natal family, therefore, a brother's wife can use her joking relationship to gain direct access to the backstage and also communicate this information to the mother. For these purposes she and her mother-in-law are classified together as 'daughters-in-law' of the family (as distinct from daughters), women of the outside, who can communicate such information to one another.

To give an example of this: when Sarla, an informant, who had been just married, came home for her first visit, her parent expected her to discuss the different aspects of life in her husband's home—the type of food eaten, the method of cooking, idiosyncrasies of the different persons in her conjugal household, etc. Parents, for all their advice to the daughters to consider the conjugal house as their own, would consider it unnatural if the daughter followed that advice to the letter, especially in the early years of marriage. However, what Sarla's parents considered odd was not only her monosyllabic answers to all these questions but also her lack of interest in clothes, ornaments, and in decorating herself. As her mother told me, a girl is supposed to look fresh and blooming if she is satisfied by her husband and not pale and withered like Sarla.⁶ However, her mother was unable to find out anything. In this context, Sarla's mother said to her son's wife, 'I am Sarla's mother. I am, therefore, helpless. But you are her *bhabhi* (brother's wife). You should find out if she is happy with her husband.'

As Radcliffe-Brown's signal contribution to joking relationship (1940, 1949) emphasized, privileged familiarity is one of the ways in which the danger arising from ambiguity in kinship relations is dealt with. It is well-known that ambiguity of symbols can provide a bridge between different levels of reality, so that it is hardly surprising to see that the ambiguity of joking relationships is used to break the dividing line between the 'backstage' and the 'frontstage' and to articulate these two levels of kinship behaviour.

While the bride's parents are worried about the sexual adequacy of her husband, the groom's parents are worried about the sexual compatibility of the new couple.⁷ If a boy does not like the bride who has been chosen for him, he may rebel by refusing to consummate the marriage. Though the taboo against discussions about sex between parents and children does not allow the parents to discuss the matter with him, this behaviour is a direct affront to them. The boy's refusal to consummate the marriage is a sign that he finds his wife ugly or deformed and the assumption is that his mother has been made to agree to the match by the lure of a large dowry.⁸ Her

⁶ The analogy with a flower is often used to discuss a woman. An unmarried girl is said to be like a bud and it is sexuality which makes a woman bloom. A girl who is sexually unfulfilled is said to look like a flower which has withered before its time.

⁷ There is considerable anxiety about the bride's fertility, among both her natal kin and her conjugal kin, but immediately after the marriage the primary anxiety centres round the consummation of the marriage.

⁸ It is interesting to note that though men participate actively in the formal negotiation of a marriage, it is the mother of the groom who is held responsible for the kind of bride that has kinswomen reprimand her in such cases either among themselves or to her face, for 'having sold the happiness of her son for a large dowry'.

Once the marriage is known to have been consummated, considerable anxiety is relieved. The sexual relation between the husband and the wife is not given overt recognition. Nevertheless, it is realized that sexuality creates strong bonds between a man and a woman. The analogies for these bonds are usually drawn from the physical world. Thus, when a man gives in to the demands of his wife which may have been considered unreasonable by his mother, it is explained by the analogy that it is in the nature of salt to dissolve in water, or that iron is always attracted towards a magnet. In other words, shared sexuality is considered to create strong natural bonds which are extremely difficult to resist. The use of physical analogies to explain this is by itself very telling. The act of coitus results in the loss of semen for a man which is deposited in the woman. Semen is considered to be concentrated blood. This is why, a woman who makes too many demands on her husband can make him ill and tired. It is said that since semen is deposited in a woman, she would become extremely powerful if she were not menstruating. Thus, on the one hand, the act of coitus is seen to weaken the man. On the other hand, sexual virility as a value of the backstage is highly prized among Punjabis. So much so, that even a statement to the effect that a particular man seems to be somewhat weak, can be used to make an insinuation that he is sexually inadequate. In cases of childlessness, these insinuations are not rare, for while the childless woman may be accused of sterility by her immediate conjugal family, her own natal family or other members of the *biradari* may blame her husband, by saying that he was always a weakening.

Whereas both copulation and procreation create physical bonds between people, there still remains one important difference. A man cannot alter the fact that he was born of one particular woman, was formed in her womb and was nourished by her milk. The demands of sexuality, on the other hand, can be satisfied by any woman, or so it is believed. A wife is replaceable in a way that a mother is not. Even for a woman, the ideal of *sati* or the ban on

been chosen. Thus if the bride is considered beautiful, the kinswomen congratulate the mother for having secured a lovely bride for her son. If the bride is ugly, it is the mother who is reprimanded. widow-remarriage is conceived as emanating from a moral rule and not from rules about human nature. On the contrary, women are often described as naturally fickle, slaves of their sexuality, who have to be controlled by strict moral rules. One of the strongest arguments put forward by those who favoured re-marriage of child-widows in the thirties was that these women, whose natural sexuality was not satisfied, were attracted either towards the life of prostitution or became a threat to stable marriages within the family....

II

KINSHIP AS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED NOMOS

In the previous section we have described the bonds which are created by the biological acts of procreation and copulation. As we have emphasized, these are ties which create strong emotional bonds between people precisely because the behaviour stemming from these ties is seen as natural. It is considered to be behaviour which is instinctive and unlearned. One who is devoid of the sentiments emanating from these facts of biology is either an ascetic who has taught himself to be above the human condition; or he is a sinister creature who is less than human. The ties created by biological kinship are treated as given. Social kinship, on the other hand, is a construct; it is conceived as governed by rules which are socially constructed. Biological kinship follows its own laws which are considered to be universal. Social kinship, on the other hand, is governed by concepts which are constructs and therefore are seen as specific to particular communities. Thus while the Punjabi Hindus would find it difficult to think of communities where mothers do not love their children or the needs of sexuality are not felt by men and women and they do recognize that in some communities mothers are allowed a greater expression of their love than in others, or that in some, women marry only once whereas in others they marry several times. Thus their conceptualization of the communities with different kinds of norms of social kinship is that these are morally inferior but not any less human.

As mentioned in the first section, moral rules about kinship do not constitute a re-statement of natural kinship. Rather, kinship morality implies a transcendence of natural kinship. The breach of moral rules is expressed in the idiom of shame (sharam, haya) and loss of face. Behaviour involving shame or loss of face may range from a simple breach of kinship etiquette to a major loss of honour.

We shall now describe kinship behaviour in the context of the family, and in the context of the *biradarri* and show how individual conduct is derived from a dialectic between natural kinship and social kinship. In terms of the life-cycle of a man or a woman, a person is expected to begin his or her married life in a lineal or collaterally joined household. Of the forty-nine marriages of living women that I recorded, there was only one case of a couple who began their married life in a nuclear household. In all other cases, the household included at least one agnate of the husband. The typical patterns of interaction between a husband and a wife in this phase of their life have been described in considerable detail (see, e.g., Karve 1965; Madan 1965). As is well-known, the rules of kinship morality demand a complete suppression of every expression of the relation of sexuality between the husband and the wife. The wife cannot retire to bed whenever she is tired. She has to either wait till everyone has gone to bed or until she is told by a senior member, usually her mother-in-law, that she may retire. Love-making is required to be discreet. In the crowded housing conditions of many of the families that were studied, it needed considerable effort on the part of the husband and the wife to ensure that no sign of it reached out. If the couple were given a separate room, they took care to see that the door of the room was never closed during the day, which would immediately be described as shameful conduct. Similarly, in the presence of her older affinal relatives, a woman would never sit on the same bed as her husband.

As is also well-known, a newly married couple ignore each other completely during the day. For instance, on arriving home in the evening, the husband may exchange greetings with everybody except his wife. Similarly, the wife is required to abstain from showing any interest in his presence. The myth is sustained that his wife is a stranger for a man, while his own mother and sister are his own blood (see Madan 1965). There is a clear recognition, however, that this is a myth, and does not reflect the true state of affairs. People know that a man faces a conflict between the biological ties created by sexuality and the previously existing biological ties with his mother. Between the two, the relation of sexuality can never claim the sanctity of the mother-child relation. The suffering and the sacrifice which the mother has undergone in order to give birth and bring up the child, endows the mother-child relationship with a greater moral claim. Whenever I drew the attention of my informants to the fact that certain couples in Hindu mythology were worshipped together as husband and wife (e.g., Shiva and Parvati or Rama and Sita), it was always pointed out to me that it was only through sacrifice that a base relation of sexuality could be transformed into a moral relationship. Thus Gauri (the name of Parvati before her marriage to Shiva) had to perform severe penance before she could get Shiva as a husband, and Sita had to be prepared to go to the forest with Rama and suffer with him.10

Thus, there is considerable tension between the ties created by sexuality and those created by procreation, and a man is often torn between loyalty to his mother and his wife. The latter loyalty may be disguised but people know it to be real. This is why attractive young women are often accused of having done *tona* or *jadu* (magic or spells) to their husbands. Since, in theory, a wife is always replaceable, the affection of a man for one particular woman stands in need of an explanation. Some mothers may wish to exonerate their own sons by explaining this attraction in terms of the magical powers of their wives, while others may recognize the generality of the phenomenon and attribute it to the strength of the ties of sexuality which supercede the earlier ties with the mother.

Sometimes a man may obey all the rules while making it clear that this ostensible conformity is only a disguise or a performance. In this case, he may give signals from the 'backstage' to convey the real state of affairs. To give an instance, in a quarrel between his sister and his newly married wife, a man beat up his wife, thus asserting his loyalty to his sister against his wife. However, he also made it clear that this behaviour of his was only in empty conformity to the rules of social kinship. He did so by making love to his wife the same night in such an indiscreet manner that it became clear to everyone that there had been no real estrangement between them. His wife told me that though it was she who had been beaten, his mother had looked like a gambler who had lost everything.

While the fact that all expressions of the bonds of sexuality are required to be curbed has been noted often enough, a related but different kind of rule has not received the attention it deserves. One of the very noticeable facts of life in a joint family is that parents of young children hardly ever fondle them in the presence of others. One of my old female informants was quite categorical that a young woman should always ignore the wailing of her child and let another woman of the family respond to his needs. Incidentally, this code of conduct applies in her conjugal as well as her natal household. Some informants were of the opinion that this derived from the fact that the children were the fruits of their parents' sexuality and hence parents felt 'shame' in fondling them or playing with them. However, I think that there is a second and equally important element in its explanation. This became clear to me when an old man watching his son playing with his grandson commented, 'why does he have to fondle and play with his own son? Does he think that we do not love his son enough?' Thus, to fondle one's children and to respond to their demands immediately, is also to cast aspersions on the ability of the other members of the family to love them or to look after them. The parents, who are directly responsible for the birth of a child, are drawn towards him by natural bonds. Their love for the child stems naturally and does not have to be proved. By disguising their love for the child they are simultaneously asserting their faith in their parents or siblings to love the child equally. This is an act of faith in the moral rules of kinship as against the biological facts of kinship. Its denial often provides material for fights within the joint family as the following case will show.

The household from which this instance is recorded consisted of seven members, whose genealogical relations and relative ages are shown in Figure 1. In this family, the eldest son Satinder had been married for a little over two years. Considerable tensions had been developing between Satinder and his younger siblings. The rela- tions of his wife Maya with his parents were also very strained, as often happens in the first few years of marriage. The particular quarrel that I witnessed started when Geetender slapped Pappu over some minor offence. This enraged Maya, who grabbed Pappu and left for another room. While going she muttered audibly to herself, 'if he considered the child his own, he would not have beaten him over such a small offence'. Maya's mother-in-law heard this and immediately remarked that Maya had crossed all limits of proper behaviour, for her remark implied (a) that Geetender did not consider Pappu as his own, and (b) [that] Geetender had no right to slap the child, which meant that Maya regarded Geetender as a stranger. When a charge of this nature is made, the quarrel rarely remains limited to the particular issue. It spills over to the entire relationship. All the important events of the past pertaining to the relationship are examined and rights and obligations reviewed. Although Maya left the room and Satinder was not even home, the younger children and the parents began a series of lengthy comments on Maya's behaviour. Geetender maintained that he had slapped the child because he considered it 'his own'. If, he argued, the members of one's own family were not going to be allowed to reprimand the child, would this task be entrusted to strangers? All the other members of the family who were present supported him. They wondered how Maya could have uttered such a sentence, dividing people who shared the same blood.

I do not know how the quarrel was finally resolved but it became apparent after a few days that the resolution had been only on the surface. Tension continued within the family. Relations between Satinder, who had not even been present on the earlier occasion, and Geetender, who had been the centre of the conflict, were very strained. A month after the first quarrel, another one took place between Satinder and Geetender. One day when Satinder was reading something, Geetender insisted on switching on the radio. Satinder repeatedly asked him to turn it off, but he ignored the request. Thus provoked, Satinder got up and slapped him. Immediately there was a furore. Geetender loudly proclaimed that his brother had slapped him because his mind had been poisoned by his wife. He further alleged that Satinder now preferred to listen to his wife's versions of events and did not believe in his own parents and siblings. The parents of the boys were also critical of Satinder. They claimed that they had spent so much money on educating Satinder in the belief that, as the eldest, he would look after his younger brothers and sisters, but these hopes had been in vain. After verbal allegations and counter-allegations of this kind, Satinder walked away saying that he was going to kill himself. Immediately, his second brother, Inder, was sent after him to bring him back. Inder almost dragged him back at which Satinder rushed into the kitchen and brought back a knife. This time he said he would cut off his own hand with which he had slapped his brother. He kept repeating that he had actually slapped his brother for a mere woman. Meanwhile a number of neighbours had gathered there and they were all participating in the happenings. The two brothers were finally persuaded to embrace each other and bring about a reconciliation. The neighbours said this was, surely, a re-enactment of Bharat-Milap, referring to the famous episode in the Ramayana where Rama and Bharat, after an initial misunderstanding, are finally reconciled. The tension again subsided temporarily. The relations within the family continued to deteriorate. Within a year, Satinder set up a separate house with his wife and child. It was quite clear that the family was being partitioned in some sense. Yet, there was genuine sorrow on both sides. Satinder was given everything which Maya had brought in her dowry. In addition, his mother gave them some vessels and other things which she thought they might need. However, no mention was made of partitioning the property. All the relatives of the family were told that Satinder had been advised by a doctor to take up a house near his place of work in order to avoid commuting. I am sure that very few people really believed this story but it was a face-saving device for Satinder's parents. Separate residence did not, however, mean that all contacts were broken between the two households. Satinder's family visited the parents on most ritual occasions. The little child was often left in his grand-parents' house for days. Maya had another child soon and her mother-in-law went over to assist her and stayed with her for the prescribed forty days despite consider- able inconvenience to herself.

In the context of the joint family, then, the rules of kinship mor- ality stress the disguising of ties generated by shared sexuality, as well as ties generated by procreation. Not only may the daughters- in-law make no claims over her husband but she should also leave her special ties with her children unstressed. Similarly, the mother-in-law is expected to disguise her own special ties with her sons and daughters. The relation between a mother-in-law and a daughter-in-law is treated as basically hostile, due to the conflict between the ties created by sexuality and procreation. However, this hostility is also not allowed free expression. In fact, I often found an exaggerated show of affection for the daughter-in-law, especially in the early years of marriage. One young woman was so exasperated by her mother-in-law's tendency to over-interpret every action of hers in a symbolic manner that she said she found it difficult to breathe in her husband's house. The exaggerated con- cern for all her responses, she said, made her feel as if everything she did was a stylized, ritual action. The suppression of natural hostility, like natural love, may be interpreted as either a mockery or a sacrifice. In this case, the daughter-in-law felt that since her mother-in-law was only pretending concern, her actions were really comic. The mother-in-law, on the other hand, often pointed out that she had made so many sacrifices for the daughter-in-law, and had looked after her better than her own daughters.

It is not that the daughter-in-law is not reprimanded in her hus- band's house. The Punjabis have a saying, *tee mo kehna te noon no summa*—to say words to the daughter meant for the daughter-in-law'. For instance, if a woman is not careful about covering her head in the presence of her elder affinal relatives, her mother-in- law may say to her daughter 'I am sure you are going to bring shame upon us. You will not even remember to cover your head in your husband's house'. Thus, subtle forms of reprimand have to be used rather than a direct frontal attack on the daughter-in-law. The interpersonal relations within the family are watched over by the members of the *biradari*, and especially the affinal relatives of the mother-in-law, who are quick to settle old scores by giving wide repor- tage about the real or imagined cruelties inflicted by her on her own daughter-in-law.

It would be clear from the discussion so far that kinship operates at two levels—the biological and the social. Honourable conduct demands a sacrifice of the natural ties created by biology and kinship morality stresses their transcendence. As Mauss and Burke have emphasized in different ways, sacrifice and victimage are means of purging the social system of its evils. The Punjabis believe that like the social order, individual personality is also purified and lifted from a 'lower' to a 'higher' self by means of sacrifice. Therefore, honourable conduct is at the expense of natural human values since it requires a sacrifice of normal sentiments and emotions. The sacrifices required in everyday life are small, leading to small vic- tories and small defeats. Sometimes, however, one is placed in a position where the victory or defeat is large and the corresponding sacrifice is also stupendous. The important point is that honour is often at the expense of human sentiments. Hence, a person may derive legitimacy for his actions from either the biological realm of kinship or the social realm of kinship, emphasizing different kinds of ends to explain his conduct.

To take an everyday example, some women believe that the proper behaviour for a daughter-in-law is to de-individualize her relationship with her child to the extent that any female member of the household can be entrusted with its care. Thus, a woman who gives the impression that she considers herself more competent to look after her child than the others, is often told, 'Does he belong more to you (*tera zyada sakka hai*)? Yet, people also know that this is an expression of the moral rules. In fact a child does feel closer to his mother, they believe, since his love for her has the force of instinct. The moral rule, de-individualizing the mother-child rela- tion is in violation of natural facts. Therefore, some women may legitimize the de-individualization by the norms of moral kinship. Other women may insist that the daughter-in-law should herself look after the child since the child is in a pre-social stage and the mother is irreplaceable for him. In this way it becomes possible for them to derive the legitimacy of their conduct from different types of ends (honour and etiquette or natural human values) which allow people to be different and to derive the legitimacy of their conduct from different types of rules.

Let us now take an example of another kind in which the stakes involved were truly large. The daughter has a special place in Punjabi families, being seen as a repository of family honour (see Yalman 1963). Dishonourable conduct on the part of a daughter can ruin the honour of the family forever, leaving the parents unfitted to show their face to the *biradari*. It is often said that it is the duty of the father to kill an errant daughter rather than allow her to smear the good name of the family. However, people usually hasten to add that few fathers would be able to fulfil this injunction since it is in stark contradiction to the natural love of the father for his daughter. As it happened, in the course of my fieldwork I heard of a case, widely reported in the newspapers, involving the alleged murder of a girl by her brothers. This girl, who was a Punjabi, was supposed to have been in love with a Tamilian and was deter- mined to marry him. She was a medical practitioner and lived in a hospital. It seems her brothers went to the hospital one day and called her home on the pretext that their mother was seriously ill. Then her mother and her brothers were alleged to have murdered her in order to prevent her from marrying outside the community. There were criminal proceedings against the brothers but they were released for lack of conclusive evidence.

Since this case was being widely discussed, I often asked my informants their opinion about the brothers' conduct. Everybody was agreed that the sister had been killed to save the honour of the family. The moral judgement of the informants on this action of the brothers varied, [however]. Some of my informants felt that the sister had been a victim, but the victimization was for higher ends. Surely, they argued, the brothers had to sacrifice their own selves in killing their beloved sister. Other informants were plainly horrified and repelled. An old man said that he would have preferred to live in shame than have the murder of his own daughter on his hands. This shows that as in the smaller victories and defeats, in the larger victories and defeats of life also, a person can make choices deriving the legitimacy of his conduct from biological or social kinship."

### III

#### Social Kinship in the Context of the *Biradari*

We have described the dialectic between the rules of natural kinship and social kinship in the context of the family. Let us now proceed to a discussion of social kinship in the context of the *biradari*. The members of a *biradari* are felt to share the same bodily particles, but this is treated as little more than biological myth. It does, however, point to the necessity of re-stating in biological terms, relations which are essentially moral. In the context of the family, inter-personal relations seem to be conducted at two levels, that of the backstage by instinctive, unlearned behaviour deriving their force from biological ties, and that of the frontstage by the learned concepts of etiquette and honour. In the context of the *biradari*, the concepts governing behaviour are all seen as socially constructed concepts. This is expressed by the phrase *duniyadari* meaning the ways of the world. Thus it is said that one has to visit relatives, or give gifts, not because these flow from the reality of natural love but because the social appearances have to be maintained. We shall now discuss the concepts which are used to order the relations within the *biradari*. It may be pointed out at the very outset that we do not propose to describe the ordering of relations within the *Biradari* through the concepts of 'juridical norms' and 'statistical norms'. It is not that the concept of juridical norms is not able to take care of the hierarchy of norms, which is clearly of great importance, but that the distinction between juridical and statistical norms implies that the best way to describe social conduct is through a distinction between the ought' and 'is' aspects of behaviour. What appears much more striking to us in the study of social behaviour is that the system offers a number of concepts (as distinct from prescriptions) which are used by persons to give a definition to a particular situation.12 This not only allows individuals to vary but also to explain the variations as legitimate in terms of differing definitions of situations. The basic principle regarding the transcendence of natural kinship retains its force within the *biradari* and expresses itself primarily in the usage of kinship terms and in gift-giving.13 The basic set of reference terms in Punjabi kinship follows the usual north Indian pattern (see Egal 1960; Leaf 1972; Yatuk 1969b). The data on kinship terms which will be presented in this paper have been collected through a record of the actual statements made by informants in real-life situations.14

[Let us consider here] the terms *bhai* (brother) and *bahen* (sister). These terms do not refer only to children of ego's parents, but are applied classificatorily and have a prolific spread. Both terms are associated clearly with ego's own generation. The use of these terms is not dependent on the sex of the speaker. The men of a male ego's generation may be referred to in the more familiar Hindi rendering of Punjabi words by the following terms: *bhai* (brother), *jeeta* (sister's husband), *sala* (wife's brother), *sadu* (wife's sister's husband), and *kadam* (child's spouse's father). The women in a male ego's own generation are classified as *bahen* (sister), *bhabhi* (brother's wife), (brother's wife), *voti* (wife), *sali* (wife's sister), *salheji* (wife's brother), and *kudamni* (child's spouse's mother).

Of all the terms for men in ego's own generation, the term *bhai* has the widest use and is the only term which is used in non-kinship and casual contexts. Let us first examine its meaning in these non-kinship contexts. When a person wishes to address a male stranger, roughly of the same generation as himself, he always chooses the term *bhai* (in Punjabi *phai* *sahab* or *pra jee*) from all the terms we have enumerated above. This stranger may be anybody but as long as the contact is cordial he is usually addressed as *bhai*. Some misunderstanding of this particular use has stemmed from the fact that we tend to assume that the term *bhai* is being used here to include the addressed person in the class of persons known as *bhai*. This is why anthropologists have looked for the similarities underlying the use of the word *bhai* in kinship and non-kinship and casual contexts. We propose that the use of the term *bhai* in these non-kinship and casual contexts is intended to exclude the use of other terms such as *sala* and *jeeta*. The term *sala*, as is well-known, connotes either an abuse or privileged familiarity, which is why its use in non-kinship contexts occurs in brawls or among close friends. The term *jeeta* similarly would make the speaker stand in the relation of *sala* to the addressed person. Therefore, it seems to us that the term *bhai* is specifically used here to exclude the usage of *sala* and *jeeta*, rather than to include the speaker among one's brothers. This is why it is misleading to explain its use in terms of any kinds of common characteristics of the class of brothers, as this does not place due emphasis on the function of exclusion which it performs in this context. ...

Just as in some contexts it is legitimate to use the term *bhai* for a person who is not related to one genealogically, so in other con- texts it becomes a breach of etiquette to use the term *bhai* for one's brother and draw attention to this relationship. ... In other words, the relation with one's own brother may be stressed in opposition to another category such as *jeeta*, but never in opposition to a genealogically distant member of the same class. The logic again derives from the desirability of transcending ties of biological kin- ship. Within the *biradari* it is not considered proper to use kinship terms in order to draw boundaries round close genealogical relatives. My informants would repeatedly introduce other people to me as their sister or brother. It would be only after the person had left that the informants would explain the actual genealogical relation or use the word 'cousin' in English to qualify the relation.

Even on ritual occasions such as marriage, when certain ritual sequences require the participation of the brother, special care is taken to include not only the bride's (or the groom's) own brother but also a genealogically distant relative of the same class, such as one of the first cousins present. This again draws attention to the basic value premise that boundaries should not be drawn round close genealogical positions. Possibly the only relations which are considered unique for purposes of ritual, are the parent-child rela- tion and the husband-wife relation. In other words, the mother or the wife cannot be substituted by another woman in ritual sequ- ences which require her participation, unless she is dead. For instance, I did not find anyone substituting for a girl's parents in the ritual of *kanyadana* (gift of a virgin) in a wedding, unless the parents were dead or the mother was a widow. In such cases the girl's brother and his wife performed this ritual act. For all other roles (e.g., brother, brother's wife, mother's brother, sister, sister's husband) that have to be represented in wedding or mortuary ritu- als, it is customary to include a close and a distant relative of that category.15

One of the important connotations of the term *bhai* in relation to *bahen* (sister) is that her care and protection are entrusted to him. Before a girl is married, it is up to the brother to avenge any attacks on her honour. These attacks may be in the form of gossip, illegiti- mate liaisons, or even eve-teasing. After a girl is married, the husband and his group also come to be entrusted with the task of protecting the girl's honour. However, whereas the brother's con- cern stems from both biological and moral ties, the husband's concern is seen to stem basically from moral rules. As we have shown earlier, moral codes are not considered as immutable as natural codes. As we have also mentioned earlier, ties of sexuality do create certain bonds between two human beings. However, sexuality does not bind two people irrevocably, inasmuch as it is believed that biologically it is possible to satisfy the sexual urge with many different women. On the other hand, the ties between parents and children or between siblings bind them irrevocably. Hence the biological strength of these ties is immutable and irrevocable. It is on the basis of these conceptions of biological kin- ship that one concludes that though both the husband and the brother are morally considered to be a woman's protectors, it is only the brother who can protect a woman against her husband.

When things are going reasonably well in a woman's conjugal household, her brother's role is confined to that of a gift-giver, since it is her privilege to receive gifts from him. However, if a woman has had a serious fight with her husband and his parents, or if she is being treated cruelly, or if her husband feels that he is not getting his share in the family property, then her brothers may take an active role in protecting her person, and her interests. Thus her brothers may have to fight against her husband and his family or they may be required to give support to her husband against his brothers. I have only the records of one such dispute in which the wife had convinced her husband that his share of the property was being appropriated by his brothers.

Her four brothers had come in a group to settle the matter with their sister's husband's brothers. As soon as they arrived, they were greeted formally but they refused to reply. Then one of the brothers of the girl said: 'We have come to remind you that the brothers of Nirmal are not dead. We had not realized that we were giving our beloved sister into the hands of monsters. We ask you to behave, otherwise the consequences will be terrible for you. I do not wish to go into any further details of the dispute. The point is that the statement "we have come to remind you that Nirmal's brothers are not dead," stresses the role of the brother as a life-long protector of the sister, even against her husband.

Behind the appearances of the deferential behaviour of bride- givers towards bride-receivers, the former are always in a state of preparedness to protect their daughter or sister in her husband's house. The suspicion that a girl was maltreated in her husband's house arises whenever the girl dies in the first few years of her mar- riage.16 For instance, a death by accident is often alleged to be a murder; in case of death due to an illness it is often assumed that proper care of the girl was not taken. People assume that a girl would have been treated callously in her husband's house since she is so easily replaceable. This is because the husband's s people can easily get another daughter-in-law along with more dowry, but her own parents cannot get another daughter. Great care is taken in the husband's house to ensure that the parents of a daugh- ter-in-law are informed if she is ill. Manifestly this behaviour stems from demands of courtesy but at a latent level it ensures that the girl's parents have the opportunity to come and see for themselves that their daughter is being looked after with proper care. It is interesting to observe that serious misdemeanours on the part of a daughter-in-law are not directly disciplined by her husband and his parents. Instead, word is sent to her father or brother to come and take her away in the case of serious charges such as that of adultery, or to discipline her in the case of less serious charges. In this sense, the girl never ceases to be a repository of honour for her parents.

However close the relation a girl may succeed in establishing with her affinal relatives, they have to be extremely careful of their reputation in case of her illness or death. Even in moments of extreme emotional collapse, I have observed the care which is taken by people to protect themselves from the possibility of gossip. For instance, a young girl of twenty died in the hospital. The death was sudden and her affinal relatives were prostrate with shock and grief. When I asked her mother-in-law whether the body will be taken straight to the cremation *ghat*, she said 'No, we have to first take it home. Otherwise, people may allege all kinds of things.' At the *syapa* (a kind of communal mourning chant), I was taken aback when a classificatory sister-in-law of the dead woman said to me 'However much they may cry just now, within a year they will get another daughter-in-law. It is the girl's parents whose grief is real. They have lost a daughter forever.' In these contexts, the terms daughter and sister are used to denote the natural closeness with the women associated with one's self. It is due to this association that a girl may refrain from using the term *bhai* in a manner that stresses his role as protector in her husband's house unless she wishes to provoke. The brother will also normally leave this aspect of his role unstressed. But the moment it becomes necessary to lift the mask, the brother emerges as the main protector of his sister, and the term *bhai* then tends to be used for the revelation of the face behind the mask. ...
